Migration Guide for CAP Java 3.0 (#892)
cap-js/docs: java/migration.md

[[toc]]

## CAP Java 2.10 to CAP Java 3.0 { #two-to-three }

::: warning

> This is a **preview** of the changes planned for CAP Java 3.0 (planned to be released July 2024)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is a **preview** of the changes planned for CAP Java 3.0 (planned to be released June 2024)
```

| `uniqueEventContexts` | `false` | `true` | Determines whether the event context interfaces should be unique for bound actions and functions. |

Both changes are causing the generation of incompatible POJOs. The new defaults can be overwritten by setting the parameters to the old values to get the former POJOs.

### Adjusted Property Defaults

Some property defaults have been adjusted:

| Property | Old Value | New Value | Explanation |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| `cds.remote.services.<key>.http.csrf.enabled` | `true` | `false` | Most APIs don't require CSRF tokens. |
| `cds.sql.hana.optimizationMode` | `legacy` | `hex` | SQL for SAP HANA is optimized for the HEX engine. |
| `cds.odata-v4.lazy-i18n.enabled` | `null` | `true` | Lazy localization is now enabled by default in multitenant scenarios. |

### Adjusted Property Behavior

| Property | New Behavior |
| --- | --- |
| `cds.outbox.persistent.enabled` | Disables all persistent outboxes independent of their specific configuration, if set to `false`. |

### Session Context Variables

| Old Variable | Replacement | type |
| --- | --- | --- |

> | `$user.tenant` | `$tenant` | removal |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| `$user.tenant` | `$tenant` | `$user.tenant` is deprecated in `@restrict` and unsupported in `@cds.on.insert|update` |
```

Author: @MattSchur and I also had internal discussions on this, he opened a PR to support $tenant in @restrict in CDS Services

One of the effects of the production profile is that the index page is disabled by default.
If you are using the root path `/` as readiness or liveness probe in Kyma you will need to make adjustments.
It is recommended to use Spring Boot actuator's `/actuator/health` endpoint instead.

[Learn more about the Production Profile.](developing-applications/configuring#production-profile){.learn-more}

### Removed feature `cds-feature-xsuaa`

The feature `cds-feature-xsuaa` has been removed. Support for XSUAA and IAS has been unified under the umbrella of `cds-feature-identity`.

It utilizes [SAP´s `spring-security` library](https://github.com/SAP/cloud-security-services-integration-library/tree/main/spring-security) instead of the deprecated [`spring-xsuaa` library](https://github.com/SAP/cloud-security-services-integration-library/tree/main/spring-xsuaa).

If your application relies on the standard security configuration by CAP Java and depend on one of the CAP starter bundles, it is expected that you don't need to adapt code.

> If you have customized the security configuration, you need to adapt it to the new library. If your application had a direct dependency to `cds-feature-xsuaa`, we recommend to adopt one of our starter bundler `cds-starter-cloudfoundry` or `cds-starter-k8s`.

Author: ```suggestion
If you have customized the security configuration, you need to adapt it to the new library. If your application had a direct dependency to `cds-feature-xsuaa`, we recommend to adopt one of our starter bundles `cds-starter-cloudfoundry` or `cds-starter-k8s`.
```

Note, that this requires at least `@sap/cds-mtxs` in version `1.12.0`.

The cds build no longer generates localized EDMX files by default anymore, but instead generates templated EDMX files and a `i18n.json` containing text bundles.
In case localized EDMX files are still required to be generated, set `--opts contentLocalizedEdmx=true` when calling `cds build`.

### Star-expand and inline-all are no longer permitted

Previously, you could not use expand or inline without explicit paths on draft-enabled entities. Now they are rejected for all entities on application service level.

For example, following statement will not be executed when submitted to an instance of [`ApplicationService`](https://www.javadoc.io/doc/com.sap.cds/cds-services-api/latest/com/sap/cds/services/cds/ApplicationService.html).

```java
Select.from(Books_.class).columns(t -> t.expand());
```

This does not impact the OData where the `expand=*` will be transformed to explicit association expand.

### Adjusted POJO class generation

Some parameter defaults of the goal `generate` have been adjusted:

| Parameter | Old Value | New Value | Explanation |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |

> | `sharedInterfaces` | `false` | `true` | Enables the usage of interfaces generated for the global types with inline anonymous arrayed types in the interfaces generated for actions and functions |

Author: @vmikhailenko Can you help clarify that. To be honest I am struggling to understand the original sentence and can't really judge if the new suggestion is semantically correct.

> | `sharedInterfaces` | `false` | `true` | Enables the usage of interfaces generated for the global types with inline anonymous arrayed types in the interfaces generated for actions and functions |

Reviewer 3: Yes, that is correct.

> | `sharedInterfaces` | `false` | `true` | Enables the usage of interfaces generated for the global types with inline anonymous arrayed types in the interfaces generated for actions and functions |

Author: But I still don't understand what it means :D What global types are you referring to? What does it mean that these interfaces are generated _with inline anonymous arrayed types_? What kind of types are we referring to here? I think to me it is not clear which types refers to a Java type and which to a CDS type.

It is recommended to use Spring Boot actuator's `/actuator/health` endpoint instead.

[Learn more about the Production Profile.](developing-applications/configuring#production-profile){.learn-more}

### Removed feature `cds-feature-xsuaa`

The feature `cds-feature-xsuaa` has been removed. Support for XSUAA and IAS has been unified under the umbrella of `cds-feature-identity`.

It utilizes [SAP´s `spring-security` library](https://github.com/SAP/cloud-security-services-integration-library/tree/main/spring-security) instead of the deprecated [`spring-xsuaa` library](https://github.com/SAP/cloud-security-services-integration-library/tree/main/spring-xsuaa).

If your application relies on the standard security configuration by CAP Java and depend on one of the CAP starter bundles, it is expected that you don't need to adapt code.

If you have customized the security configuration, you need to adapt it to the new library. If your application had a direct dependency to `cds-feature-xsuaa`, we recommend to adopt one of our starter bundles `cds-starter-cloudfoundry` or `cds-starter-k8s`.

> [Learn more about the security configuration.](./security.md#xsuaa-ias){.learn-more}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[Learn more about the security configuration.](./security#xsuaa-ias){.learn-more}
```

> [Learn more about the security configuration.](./security.md#configure-xsuaa-and-ias-authentication--xsuaa-ias){.learn-more}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[Learn more about the security configuration.](./security.md#xsuaa-ias){.learn-more}
```

Note, that this requires at least `@sap/cds-mtxs` in version `1.12.0`.

The cds build no longer generates localized EDMX files by default anymore, but instead generates templated EDMX files and a `i18n.json` containing text bundles.
In case localized EDMX files are still required to be generated, set `--opts contentLocalizedEdmx=true` when calling `cds build`.

### Star-expand and inline-all are no longer permitted

Previously, you could not use expand or inline without explicit paths on draft-enabled entities. Now they are rejected for all entities on application service level.

For example, following statement will not be executed when submitted to an instance of [`ApplicationService`](https://www.javadoc.io/doc/com.sap.cds/cds-services-api/latest/com/sap/cds/services/cds/ApplicationService.html).

```java
Select.from(BOOKS).columns(b -> b.expand());
```

This does not impact OData where `expand=*` is transformed into expands for all associations.

### Adjusted POJO class generation

Some parameter defaults of the goal `generate` have been adjusted:

| Parameter | Old Value | New Value | Explanation |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |

> | `sharedInterfaces` | `false` | `true` | Interfaces are generated for the global types with inline anonymous arrayed types, `sharedInterfaces` enables their usage in the interfaces generated for actions and functions as well. |

Author: ```suggestion
| `sharedInterfaces` | `false` | `true` | Interfaces for global arrayed types with inline anonymous type are now generated exactly once. `sharedInterfaces` ensures such types are not generated as inline interfaces again, if used in events, actions or functions. |
```

[[toc]]

## CAP Java 2.10 to CAP Java 3.0 { #two-to-three }

::: warning
This is a **preview** of the changes planned for CAP Java 3.0 (planned to be released July 2024)
:::

### Minimum Versions

CAP Java 3.0 increased some minimum required versions:

| Dependency | Minimum Version |
| --- | --- |
| Maven | 3.6.3 |
| Cloud SDK | 5.9.0 |

### Production Profile `cloud`

The Production Profile now defaults to `cloud`. This ensures that various property defaults suited for local development are changed to recommended secure values for production.

[Learn more about the Production Profile.](developing-applications/configuring#production-profile){.learn-more}

### Adjusted Property Defaults

Some property defaults have been adjusted:

| Property | Old Value | New Value | Explanation |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| `cds.remote.services.<key>.http.csrf.enabled` | `true` | `false` | Most APIs don't require CSRF tokens. |

> ### Replaced Poperties

Reviewer 4: Properties

The Production Profile now defaults to `cloud`. This ensures that various property defaults suited for local development are changed to recommended secure values for production.

One of the effects of the production profile is that the index page is disabled by default.

> If you are using the root path `/` for readiness or liveness probing in Kyma you will need to adjustment them, in this case

Author: @smahati "readiness probe" and "liveness probe" are fixed terms in the Kyma/Kubernetes world: https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/configure-pod-container/configure-liveness-readiness-startup-probes/. I don't know if you were aware of that, but I think it might make sense to keep those terms.

Reviewer 5: hmm yes, adding an article there would have been better, I'll write that on main.

The cds build no longer generates localized EDMX files by default anymore, but instead generates templated EDMX files and a `i18n.json` containing text bundles.
In case localized EDMX files are still required to be generated, set `--opts contentLocalizedEdmx=true` when calling `cds build`.

### Star-expand and inline-all are no longer permitted

Previously, you could not use expand or inline without explicit paths on draft-enabled entities. Now they are rejected for all entities on application service level.

For example, following statement will not be executed when submitted to an instance of [`ApplicationService`](https://www.javadoc.io/doc/com.sap.cds/cds-services-api/latest/com/sap/cds/services/cds/ApplicationService.html).

```java

> Select.from(Books_.class).columns(t -> t.expand());

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Select.from(BOOKS).columns(b -> b.expand());
```

```

> This does not impact the OData where the `expand=*` will be transformed to explicit association expand.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This does not impact OData where `expand=*` is transformed into expands for all associations.
```
